https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/endgame-sre-contributing-factors-amy-tobey/

Ask me for a root cause, and I'll always answer, it's a lack of compassion. It is fair to ask again, what happened!? Now that's a better question. When we analyze incidents in a business context, the business needs something back. For a long time, we focused on giving back root cause analysis, finding that essential thing that went wrong, the thing we can fix or prevent, the person we can retrain, some _action_ to take, and then move on with business. We all know in our gut that this is wrong. Instead, what happened is a confluence of events, trends, inertia, people, complexity, pressure, and culture coming together to push that button, to put the button there, to put the person there, to have that person work late last night...

As engineers and leaders, we have have to draw the line somewhere though. We can't include all of causality in our report to stakeholders about what happened, and what we're going to do. So we need to break it down, and as I work more with contributing factors in incidents, I'm finding that they are also useful for understanding our environment every day.

In an attempt to share this, I wrote a talk called [The Endgame of SRE](https://qconsf.com/presentation/oct2022/endgame-sre). As I struggled to express how I see contributing factors in software engineering, it occurred to me that I need a story, so obviously I threw away the slides and built a game in RPGMaker MZ to tell it. In the talk, I visit some teams to talk about sociotechnical factors in software. To get back to contributing factors, I'm going to explain what's going on with these teams in lists of contributing factors.

Team Disco is a software service team that struggles to deliver consistently. They typically do good work but their velocity is all over the place. Here's why:

- Churn: these folks are doing too much stuff, and trying to do it all, so delivery is slow. They experimented with partitioning their workload to individuals but then those individuals started burning out. While their average velocity rose, it's still all over the place sprint by sprint, and their priorities are still juggling too much.
- Hidden Glue Work: some of the folks on this team take care of many small things all over the infrastructure, from patching systems to tuning CI/CD jobs. This work is incremental and far away from feature work. Product & leadership struggle to understand the value and connection to customer outcomes.
The next team we visit is called Mahogany Row, and it's the management, and a couple other folks who are there to supplicate wisdom. It's easy to slag on leaders, but at the end of the day we're people too. In this case, it's based on a guy I worked with earlier in my career, who would talk to clients and come back and reprioritize work, slowing the teams to a crawl.

- Process Bypass: senior leaders with good intention are bypassing product and planning processes to get stuff built. The folks in the leaf teams don't feel empowered to push back and juggle their schedules to make it happen. Other projects are doomed, but the special deliveries get done and everybody celebrates the win.
- Hierarchical Communications: like the telephone game, the more minds a bit of information has to pass through, the more likely it is to be lost on the way. Because the organization leans hard on its hierarchy for control, communications tend to go up and down the chain of command, and along the way everyone mutters about how communication is hard.


Team Inferno is everything a toxic team could be. The Boss likes being called The Boss. He doesn't understand why anyone would want a life outside of work. There's a guy named Tenex who slings code faster than anyone, but hasn't slept in a week so it's not very good. The lead dev is stamping PRs so the intern doesn't get fired, and Kirito wants to go back to his old world.

- 3rd-generation Leadership: The Boss makes all decisions, tells his people what to do, and puts the fear of Boss in them when they step out of line. This results in poor psychological safety and engagement in the work. People work a lot of hours as demanded, and as a result, the team's software is riddled with vulnerabilities and crashes constantly. Through heroics, it is brought back each time. This has led to low employee satisfaction and high attrition and signs are that more attrition is coming.
- Metricism: The Boss brought in a tool to measure his team's software development activities. The tool's default dashboard showed mean time to pull request merged was high, so he took action, and commanded his team to improve it. He yelled at the intern for having the most comments on her PRs. It turns out this was because Leah Dev, the intern's mentor was very thorough and trying to teach through reviews. After the commandment to improve MTTM, Leah and the intern decided they would stamp each others' PRs so nobody else would get yelled at. The Boss was pleased and yelled about other things.

It's not all bosses and churn, one team does solid work and goes home for dinner on time. Team Marathon recently had an incident, but they're chill about it. A couple of them are all geeked up about the retrospective. They work together well, share knowledge with each other, and have a lot of fun. As we saw, the environment around them isn't great, so there's pressure on them to go harder and it's burning Nyaanager Evie out. A nice thing about contributing factors is that we don't have to judge what went well and what didn't, we call out all the things we can identify, and there's some stuff that looks good in this team.

- Psychological Safety: deep psychological safety isn't really available to us in most commercial software settings, but we can strive for it, and reap the benefits of increased cognitive capacity, easy coordination, and people engaged deeply with their work. The business outcomes here are that well rested and safe people write better code, with fewer exploits, and better customer satisfaction over time. Because they're focused and in the moment, the systems they build don't decay right away, and they can keep moving new product for the long haul.
- Messengers Thanked: Hidaslo Xela recently set up an alert on SLO error budget burndown. The oncall was paged and jumped right on it. The bug was intermittent, only a few percent of requests being impacted, so the oncall & team exhausted themselves tracking it down. Fortunately, they found a pattern in the trace data and figured out the problem. A roll-forward patch was applied and Nyaanager Evie let the team go for the day. Various folks on the team expressed gratitude for the new alert, so they could all enjoy their weekends knowing their service was working for their customers.
These are just a few examples from my talk, barely edited, and I'm going to post this before I overthink it. What I hope you take away is that there is always a more compassionate explanation for what is happening around us. When we look for it, we can see through our biases, hindsight and otherwise, to really understand how we got here. Team Disco needs help with churn. Mahogany Row needs to touch grass and listen to their sharp end more. Team Inferno needs a new manager and probably a new team and probably a new stack. We've all been there right? Finally, Team Marathon and Nyaanager Evie come together to collaborate and have fun, the way software should be. When we choose to be compassionate and consider our environment holistically in analysis, everyone who is along for the learning gets to grow, and that's how we get to build the software cultures we all want to work in.
