- **18:23** [[quick capture]]: ​
  Title:: "Leader election in distributed systems"
  Source:: "https://aws.amazon.com/builders-library/leader-election-in-distributed-systems/"
  Created:: "2025-02-18T18:23:02-07:00"
  Leader election is the simple idea of giving one thing (a process, host, thread, object, or human) in a distributed system some special powers. Those special powers could include the ability to assign work, the ability to modify a piece of data, or even the responsibility of handling all requests in the system.
  
  Leader election is a powerful tool for improving efficiency, reducing coordination, simplifying architectures, and reducing operations. On the other hand, leader election can introduce new failure modes and scaling bottlenecks. In addition, leader election may make it more difficult for you to evaluate the correctness of a system.
  
  Because of these complications, we carefully consider other options before implementing leader election. For data processing and workflows, workflow services like [AWS Step Functions](https://aws.amazon.com/step-functions/) can achieve many of the same benefits as leader election and avoid many of its risks. For other systems, we often implement idempotent APIs, optimistic locking, and other patterns that make a single leader unnecessary.* Leader election is the simple idea of giving one thing (a process, host, thread, object, or human) in a distributed system some special powers. Those special powers could include the ability to assign work, the ability to modify a piece of data, or even the responsibility of handling all requests in the system.
  * Leader election is a powerful tool for improving efficiency, reducing coordination, simplifying architectures, and reducing operations. On the other hand, leader election can introduce new failure modes and scaling bottlenecks. In addition, leader election may make it more difficult for you to evaluate the correctness of a system.
  * Because of these complications, we carefully consider other options before implementing leader election. For data processing and workflows, workflow services like [AWS Step Functions](https://aws.amazon.com/step-functions/) can achieve many of the same benefits as leader election and avoid many of its risks. For other systems, we often implement idempotent APIs, optimistic locking, and other patterns that make a single leader unnecessary.